---
layout: post
title:  "Chavin!!!"
date:   2019-08-01 23:50:53 -0500
categories: chavin peru stanford
---
Hi! I’m Vivian, a student of archaeology and mechanical engineering at Stanford University. This summer, I’m studying archaeology as part of the Chavín de Huántar archaeology field school, working with the robotics team to build microrobots to explore the canal systems safely, and filming experiences and archaeological techniques in 360 degrees for VR!

Chavín de Huántar

It’s been about 5 weeks now since we’ve arrived to the small town of  Chavín de Huántar, which houses the world-famous UNESCO archaeological heritage site Chavín de Huántar in the Ancash region of Peru. Chavín is a pre-Incan religious center that has historically served as a cultural and religious center of influence in South America. Fun fact: it’s on the 50 soles bill!

I’m coming here as an archaeology student under professor John Rick, who has been working at the site with his wife Rosa for over 25 years. To be honest, I didn’t really know what archaeology work entailed before coming here, but through their work, I’ve seen how archaeology can enrich communities by 1) making discoveries which allow people to connect with their cultural heritage and 2) working closely with the Ministry of Culture to increase the tourism and economic well-being of an area.

Chavín is a small small town, with one main plaza and Main Street, a population of fewer than 10,000 people, and an area of 419 square kilometers. The lights in the plaza flicker when too many people are using the electricity and many very cute animals like pigs, sheep, dogs, and cats.

Archaeological work

The Chavín Strangler Junior

I suppose when coming here I imagined we’d be working in a lot of dark musty tunnels, fearing collapse at any moment a la Indiana Jones. But, something John has said that has really stuck with me is that “There is really no archaeological discovery that will profoundly impact the way we live in our societies today, no archaeological discovery worth risking your life over.” I’m really glad for this perspective in viewing archaeology in the bigger picture.

In any case, the workflow of archaeological work goes something like this: excavate a level (a volume of soil that is more or less distinct from the soil next to it); screen for materials in the soil like ceramic, bones, or artifacts; document the area using drawings, measurements, and forms; rinse and repeat! The workflow helps archaeologists look back on the things they have excavated, because once you excavate, you can’t un-excavate the site so it’s exactly the same as it was before. By looking at the forms and drawings, we can look for patterns after the excavation and make theories about what occurred in an area.
 I’m currently excavating in the explanade area, which we think is a domestic area. We’ve found some Chavín floors, ceramic pieces, and a bevy of interesting bone pieces, ranging from otter to human. It’s been pretty interesting to hear theories about what occurred years ago, and my co-workers are great! From making jokes about archaeological findings to sharing differences between American and Andean culture, there’s something to learn everyday. My supervisor is also an amazing artist, as archaeology is his second career. It’s been great to learn about drawing from him as I fill out forms.

Festivities
 When work ends for the day, my friends and I love exploring the area around Chavín. One of our favorite pastimes is hiking, as Chavín is extremely high in elevation (which took a lot of getting used to!) and surrounded by stunning mountains on all sides. In Andean mythology, areas are protected by Apus, spirits of the mountains. In Chavín, these are Shallapa, Poggog, Wagag y Huantzan; and during the ceremony at the beginning of the field season we prayed to each of these Apus by offering coca leaves and chicha (a refreshing corn beer) in each of the four directions. So far, we’ve hiked to Poggog, which has a beautiful archaeological site and a great view of the glacier Huantzan. Another favorite hike was along the Wacheqsa river, fording rocks and walking across branches. One really long hike was when we took a detour to a nearby archaeological site on the way to San Marcos, a nearby town, extending our hike from 1.5 hours to 5 hours!! But it was amazing to see the change in the landscape, from sheep farmers to marshy hills to a newly built park on the edge of San Marcos. We’ve also made it a tradition to hike a few times a week after work to the cross, a mirador (viewing point) that overlooks Chavín. It takes about half an hour each way and is excellent for watching the sunset before dinner.

During one of our first weeks in the town, we were invited to a party at the local high school to celebrate the anniversary of the school system. In the large sports field of the school, we danced to loud music with kids of all ages as their parents watched on from the stands. Meanwhile, a Castillo (a castle) of fireworks was constructed layer by layer. At midnight, the firework castle was lit from the bottom and each layer exploded in its own way, sending sparks flying over us all as we held hands and ran in a circle around it (some shrieks of fright, some laughs of joy). Meanwhile, a very brave dog tried to attack the sparks and I wished I could speak dog to explain to it that the sparks were not conscious :(

We later returned to the high school to do a Foldscope workshop and teach kids about an origami microscope. My friend Belle has worked with the Foldscope organization at Stanford before, leading workshops in other countries. The high school is small, but has dedicated principals as well as teachers from Enseña Perú, an organization like Teach for America. These teachers explained to us how schools in rural Perú aren’t the best equipped, and students often face difficulties at home. However, there were great initiatives at the school, from a science fair to entrepreneurship fair to traditional dance practice.

Finally, just last week we were in the middle of a festival, so there was loud music playing well into the night and the booming sound of skyrockets all throughout the day. There were more of those amazing firework castles, and this time my hair caught on fire! My friends and I went to see a corrida (bull fight) in the new stadium where clowns teased the bulls and vendors sold all sorts of snacks like popcorn, ice cream, and freesias con crema. Another favorite event was the march of the virgen, when we created an alfombra de acerín - a colorful sawdust carpet that the virgen would run over on her float as trumpets blared enthusiastically. There were also a bunch of vendors who came into town, setting up shop on a large street selling all sorts of home goods and clothes. Meanwhile, food vendors lined the streets selling pollos broaster, mostritos, raspadillas, and more. There was even a Festicuy - a guinea pig festival where we got to see very cute guinea pigs, and very cooked guinea pigs too.
